Analyse reviews (#14)
inbo/bayesian-workshop-2023: source/workshop_1_mcmc_en_brms_eng.Rmd

---

> title: "Workshop Bayesian statistics 2023"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Tutorial Bayesian statistics"
```

# Set up
library(knitr)
library(here)
opts_chunk$set(
  echo = TRUE,
  message = FALSE,
  warning = FALSE)
opts_knit$set(root.dir = here())
```

```{r packages}
# Packages
library(GLMsData)  # datasets foror GLMs
library(tidyverse) # data wrangling and visualising
library(brms)      # fitting Bayesian models
library(bayesplot) # visualise MCMC and posterior predictive checks
library(tidybayes) # wrangling and visualising Bayesian models

# Conflicten tussen packages
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(dplyr::filter)
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(dplyr::lag)
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(brms::ar)
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(brms::dstudent_t)
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(brms::pstudent_t)
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(brms::qstudent_t)
conflicted::conflicts_prefer(brms::rstudent_t)
conflicted::conflict_prefer("rhat", "brms")
```

# Theoretical background

## What is Bayesian statistics?
In this section we briefly review some basic principles of Bayesian statistics.
We would also like to refer to the presentation of October 24, 2023  ([infomoment 24/10/2023](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1MIWu8-LnhTUnKKAchjI7FEmaJ8TN_1mb)).

```{r, purl = FALSE}
data.frame(
  what = c(

>    "interpretation probability",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   "interpretation of probability",
```

   "used knowledge",
   "hypothesis tests",
   "terminology",
   "parameters and data"
  ),
  Frequentist = c(
    "long term relative frequency",
    "data only",
    "chance of data that is at least as extreme as the collected data",
    "p-value, confidence interval, type 1 and type 2 error ...",
    "parameters are fixed and unknown, data is random"
  ),
  Bayesian = c(
    "relative probability",
    "data and prior knowledge",
    "probability that the hypothesis is correct",
    "prior, likelihood, posterior, credible interval ...",
    "parameters are random and have a distribution, data is fixed"
  )
) %>%
  kable(booktabs = TRUE, 
        col.names = c("", "Frequentist", "Bayesian"))
```

> Why should you want to use Bayesian models?

Reviewer: of misschien: "What are the benefits of Bayesian models?"

> - All frequentist models can also be approximated by a Bayesian model, but not all Bayseian models can be modeled in a frequentist way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All frequentist models can also be approximated by a Bayesian model, but not all Bayesian models can be modelled in a frequentist way.
```

> - Fit more complex models with time and space effects or with differential equations (Ordinary Differential Equations, ODE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fit more complex models with temporal and spatial components or with differential equations (Ordinary Differential Equations, ODE).
```

- Interpretation is sometimes easier / more intuitive.

> - You obtain a complete probability distribution for each parameter, making it easy for further calculations or simulations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You obtain a complete probability distribution for each parameter, making it easy for subsequent calculations or simulations.
```

- You can combine different sources of data in an integrated model.
- Include additional data / conclusions / expectations in your model using a prior.

### Statistical inference

> Statistical inference is trying to learn something about a (population) parameter based on data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Statistical inference is concerned with trying to learn something about a (population) parameter based on data.
```

Suppose we are interested in the number of ant species found in a research site of a pre-specified size.
Numbers are often specified by a Poisson distribution since this distribution only has a probability mass at positive integers.

$$ X \sim Poisson(\lambda)$$
with $X$ the number of ant species and $\lambda$ the parameter we want to estimate.
In a Poisson distribution, there is only one parameter; $\lambda$ is equal to the mean and variance of the distribution.
We do not know the true value of $\lambda$ *a priori*.
Our model defines a collection of probability models; one for each possible value of $\lambda$.
We call this collection of models the *likelihood*.

In the figure below we show three examples of a potential likelihood.

> They are three probability density functions of Poisson distributions, each with a different parameter $\lambda$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are three probability density functions of Poisson distributions, each with a different parameter $\lambda$.
```

```{r, purl = FALSE}
likelihood <- data.frame(x = rep(seq(0, 25), 3),
                         lambda = c(rep(5, 26), rep(10, 26), rep(15, 26))) %>%
  mutate(prob = stats::dpois(x, lambda = lambda),
         lambda = as.factor(lambda))
likelihood %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = x, y = prob, color = lambda)) +
  geom_point() + 
  geom_errorbar(aes(ymin = 0, ymax = prob), width = 0) + 
  xlab("number of ant species at a site") + 
  ylab("probability mass")
```

Suppose we find 8 different species of ants on one particular site.
Our likelihood tells us that there are an infinite number of values for $\lambda$, which gives us the result 8.
The figure below shows that the probability of $X = 8$ is different in each of the three shown Poisson distributions.

```{r, purl = FALSE}
likelihood %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = x, y = prob, color = lambda)) +
  geom_point() + 
  geom_errorbar(aes(ymin = 0, ymax = prob), width = 0) +
  geom_bar(data = likelihood %>% filter(x == 8),
           color = "grey", stat = "identity", alpha = 0.7) + 
  xlab("Number of ant species at a site") + 
  ylab("probability mass") +
  facet_grid(cols = vars(lambda))
```

> Each of these models, with a different value of $\lambda$, can give us the value of $X=8$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these models, with a different value of $\lambda$, can give us the probability of $X=8$.
```

The likelihood function gives us, for each potential value of the parameter, the probability of the data.

> The figure below shows this for our data with only one observation $X=8$.

Reviewer: Hier moet dat een kleine x zijn denk ik omdat het over een datapunt gaat en niet de variabele

Bayesian inference, on the other hand, uses Bayes' rule:

$$
p(\lambda|X) = \frac{p(X|\lambda) * p(\lambda)}{p(X)}
$$

This ensures that we will have a probability for **every** potential value of $\lambda$.

The parameters in Bayesian models therefore have a distribution.
This contrasts with frequentist inference where the solution space for $\lambda$ is split into two parts: values that are likely or not likely.

In our example, the following meaning is given to each of the elements in Bayes' rule:

- $\lambda$ the average number of ant species
- $X$ the data
- $p(X|\lambda)$ the *likelihood*
- $p(\lambda)$ the *prior*
- The denominator $p(X)$ makes exact Bayesian inference difficult and has several interpretations:
  - Before we collect data, this is the *prior predictive distribution*
  - If we have data, this is a number that normalizes the posterior. This is called *evidence* or *marginal likelihood*.
- $p(\lambda|X)$ is the *posterior*. It is a probability distribution. This posterior is the starting point for all further analysis in Bayesian inference.

> On this [website](https://iupbsapps.shinyapps.io/KruschkeFreqAndBayesApp/) you will find a nice illustration of how prior and likelihood are combined to obtain a posterior ([tutorial](https://jkkweb.sitehost. iu.edu/KruschkeFreqAndBayesAppTutorial.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On this [website](https://iupbsapps.shinyapps.io/KruschkeFreqAndBayesApp/) you will find a nice illustration of how prior and likelihood are combined to obtain a posterior ([tutorial](https://jkkweb.sitehost.iu.edu/KruschkeFreqAndBayesAppTutorial.html)).
```

> **An easier example of Bayes' rule**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**A simple example of Bayes' rule**
```

> Suppose you go to the doctor and he says you test positive for a rare disease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you go to the doctor, and he says you test positive for a rare disease.
```

You would like to know what the probability is that you actually have the disease, given that positive test, and you use Bayes' theorem and the "Law of total probability":

$$
p(\text{you have the disease}|T^+) = \frac{p(T^+|\text{you have the disease})*p(\text{you have the disease})}{p(T^+)} \\
= \frac{p(T^+|\text{you have the disease})*p(\text{you have the disease})}{p(T^+|\text{you have the disease})*p(\text{you have the disease}) + p(T^+|\text{you do not have the disease})* p(\text{you do not have the disease)}}\\
=\frac{0.99*0.001}{0.99*0.001 + 0.05*0.9999}\\
=1.94\%
$$
Bayes' rule allows us to update our prior knowledge about the disease (only 0.1% have the disease in the general population) with the new information (the data: a positive test) to obtain the posterior.
Although, at first glance, the test seems quite reliable, Bayes' rule shows that the probability that you have the disease, given that you tested positive, is still quite low. 

## Parameter estimation in Bayesian statistics

Remember Bayes' rule:
$$
p(\lambda|X) = \frac{p(X|\lambda) * p(\lambda)}{p(X)}
$$

> We already mentioned that the denominatorof this equation is very difficult to calculate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already mentioned that the denominator of this equation is very difficult to calculate.
```

There are three possible solutions:

- *Conjugate priors*: For some distributions and combinations of priors and likelihoods, it is possible to obtain an analytical solution (see [this list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjugate_prior)). However, this limits our options:
  - only possible for some univariate and bivariate problems
  - the conjugate priors limit the freedom to define prior knowledge (e.g. zero-inflation...)
- *MCMC*: we get information about the distribution by sampling it instead of calculating it exactly.
- *INLA*: Integrated Nested Laplace Approximation is an alternative to MCMC. There is no sampling, which makes the algorithm work faster. This is especially interesting for large or complex models.

> We will focus on MCMC in this workshop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will focus on MCMC in this tutorial.
```

### What is MCMC?

> MCMC stands for 'Markov chain Monte Carlo'. Markov chain is an algorithm to simulate a random walk and Monte Carlo is an algorithm to explore the parameter space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MCMC stands for 'Markov chain Monte Carlo'. A Markov chain is an algorithm to simulate a random walk and Monte Carlo is an algorithm to sample from the parameter space.
```

Reviewer: Licht aangepast omdat ik het gevoel had dat "exploring the parameter space" vooral de verdienste is van de random walk terwijl de monte carlo vooral een random sampling algoritme is. Maar ik moet toegeven dat ik het zelf ook moeilijk vind om zo in 1 zin uit te leggen.

> The posterior distribution can be compared to a mountain (see figure below). The top of the mountain is where the parameter value is most likely after combining the likelihood of your data with your prior. However, the location and shape of the mountain peak is unknown. The goal of an MCMC algorithm is to efficiently explore the mountain peak and its surroundings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The posterior distribution of a parameter can be compared to a mountain (see figure below). The top of the mountain is where the parameter value is most likely after combining the likelihood of your data with your prior belief. However, the location and shape of the mountain peak is unknown. The goal of an MCMC algorithm is to efficiently explore the mountain peak and its surroundings.
```

> An MCMC algorithm takes random samples from the posterior and generates a series of steps that explores the entire range of the posterior distribution. The rules ensure that the sampler stays near the top of the mountain the entire time. It is a random walk in the parameter space in the area where the posterior distribution is highest (the top of the mountain). The size and direction of the step varies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An MCMC algorithm takes random samples from the posterior and generates a series of steps that explores the entire range of the posterior distribution. The rules ensure that the sampler stays near the top of the mountain the entire time. It is a random walk in the parameter space where the posterior distribution is highest. The size and direction of each step varies.
```

> When taking a step uphill, the MCMC always continues. If the step is downhill, the MCMC does not always continue. The probability of going downhill depends on how deep the step down is. Small steps downward are often taken. If the step downwards is very steep, the MCMC usually will not go into that directions and sample a new step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When taking a step uphill, the MCMC always continues. If the step is downhill, the MCMC does not always continue. The probability of going downhill depends on how deep the step down is. Small steps downwards are often taken. If the step downwards is very steep, the MCMC usually will not go into that direction and sample a new step.
```

> The absolute height of the mountain (posterior likelihood) in itself does not matter. Only the relative differences or shape of the mountain matters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The absolute height of the mountain (posterior likelihood) in itself does not matter. Only the relative differences or shape of the mountain matters.
This means we do not need to calculate the denominator of Bayes' rule, which is the reason why the algorithm is frequently used in Bayesian statistics.
```

![Metropolis rules](../media/MCMC4b.png)

A simple MCMC algorithm is the Metropolis algorithm. It is described by these formal rules:

1. Choose a starting value for the parameter
2. Calculate the posterior (= likelihood + prior) for that parameter
3. Choose a new parameter value at random, but 'close' to the previous one
4. Calculate the new posterior for that new parameter value
5. Is the new posterior $>$ current posterior $\Rightarrow$ new value kept
6. Is the new posterior $<$ current posterior $\Rightarrow$
   a) Calculate the ratio (new posterior / previous posterior).

>    b) Accept the new value with a probability equal to the ratio. (so the lower the new likelihood, the smaller the chance of acceptance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   b) Accept the new value with a probability equal to the ratio (so the lower the new likelihood, the smaller the chance of acceptance).
```

}
```

```{r}
ggplot(df, aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = post)) +
  geom_raster(aes(fill = post)) + geom_contour(colour = "black") +
  scale_fill_gradientn(colours = rainbow(n = 4))
```

To start the MCMC, we need to choose starting values for $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$:

```{r}
mcmc_small <- MCMC_metro(x = x,         # vector x waarden
                         y = y,         # vector y waarden
                         N = 150,       # lengte van de MCMC
                         sigma = 1,     # stapgrootte (sd)
                         init_b0 = 12,  # initiële waarde beta_0 (intercept)
                         init_b1 = 6)   # initiële waarde beta_1 (helling)
```

```{r}
ggplot(df, aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = post)) +
  geom_raster(aes(fill = post)) +
  geom_contour(binwidth = 20, colour = "black") +
  scale_fill_gradientn(colours = rainbow(n = 4)) +
  geom_path(data = mcmc_small,
            aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = NA), colour = "black") +
  geom_point(data = mcmc_small,
             aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = NA), colour = "red") +
  coord_cartesian(xlim = c(-1, 14.5), ylim = c(-3, 7)) +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```

> The starting value quite far from the maximum likelihood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The starting value is quite far from the maximum likelihood.
```

It takes a while for the MCMC to stabilize in the vicinity of the top of the mountain.

> Therefore, the first part of the MCMC is never used. This is the 'burn-in' (or warm-up in BRMS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the first part of the MCMC is never used. This is called the 'burn-in' or 'warm-up'.
```

mcmc_l <- MCMC_metro(x = x,
                     y = y,
                     N = 5000,
                     sigma = 1,
                     init_b0 = 12,
                     init_b1 = 6)
```

```{r}
p1 <- ggplot(df, aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = post)) +
  geom_raster(aes(fill = post)) +
  geom_contour(binwidth = 20, colour = "black") +
  scale_fill_gradientn(colours = rainbow(n = 4)) +
  geom_path(data = mcmc_l,
            aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = NA), colour = "black") +
  geom_point(data = mcmc_l,
             aes(x = beta_0, y = beta_1, z = NA), colour = "red") +
  coord_cartesian(xlim = c(-1, 14.5), ylim = c(-3, 7)) +
  theme(legend.position = "none")

p2 <- ggplot(data = mcmc_l, aes(x = beta_0)) + geom_histogram(bins = 50) +
  scale_x_continuous(limits = c(-1, 14.5), breaks = seq(-1, 14.5, 1)) +
  theme(axis.title.x = element_blank())

p3 <- ggplot(data = mcmc_l, aes(x = beta_1)) + geom_histogram(bins = 50) +
  coord_flip() +
  scale_x_continuous(limits = c(-3, 7), breaks = seq(-3, 7, 1)) +
  theme(axis.title.y = element_blank())

empty <- ggplot()

gridExtra::grid.arrange(p2, ggplot(), p1, p3, ncol = 2, nrow = 2,
  widths = c(4, 1), heights = c(1, 4))
```

> The MCMC for each parameter can be displayed in a 'trace plot'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCMC for each parameter can be displayed in a so called 'trace plot' where we visualise the sampled parameter values over time.
```

```{r}
ann_text <- tibble(param = c("beta_0", "beta_1"),
                   x = 210,
                   y = c(max(mcmc_l$beta_0), max(mcmc_l$beta_1)),
                   lab = "burn-in")
mcmc_l %>%
  dplyr::select(iter, beta_0, beta_1) %>%
  pivot_longer(cols = c("beta_0", "beta_1"), names_to = "param") %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = iter, y = value)) + geom_line() +
  facet_wrap(~param, nrow = 2, scales = "free_y") +
  annotate("rect",  xmin = 0, xmax = 200, ymin = -Inf, ymax = +Inf,
           alpha = 0.3, fill = "gold") +
  geom_label(data = ann_text, aes(label = lab, x = x, y = y),
             hjust = "left", vjust = "top",
             fill = "gold")
```

> Estimation of `beta_0` (intercept)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary statistics of `beta_0` (intercept)
```

```{r}
quantile(mcmc_l$beta_0[200:5000], probs = c(0.05, 0.5, 0.95))
```

> Estimation of `beta_1` (slope)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary statistics of `beta_1` (slope)
```

```{r}
quantile(mcmc_l$beta_1[200:5000], probs = c(0.05, 0.5, 0.95))
```

> The samples in the MCMC are close together. To obtain more independent samples, we could save only every $x^{th}$ value of the MCMC (Thinning). This  saves significant memory space, without sacrificing too much on the quality (independence) of the sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The samples in the MCMC are consecutive. To obtain more independent samples, we could save only every $x^{th}$ value of the MCMC (thinning). This saves memory space, while increasing the quality (independence) of the sample. The final number of iterations however should remain large enough to correctly calculate summary statistics.
```

There are more sophisticated samplers such as WinBugs, Jags or Stan, but the MCMC principles are always the same.

> The 'brms' package uses the stan sampler by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **brms** package in R (see further) uses the Stan sampler by default.
```

> Once we know the posterior, there are several possibilities for point estimates in Bayesian inference (see also figures below):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we know the posterior, there are several possibilities to obtain point estimates in Bayesian inference (see also figures below):
```

- the posterior mean
- the posterior median
- maximum a posteriori (MAP) or the mode. The mode can sometimes be far from the mean and median.

> There are also different options for displaying uncertainty:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are also different options for quantifying uncertainty:
```

> - Highest posterior density interval (HPDI): this is interesting if, for example, it is important to avoid regions with low density.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Highest posterior density interval (HPDI): A $100*(1-\alpha)$% interval countains $100*(1-\alpha)$% of the posterior density. This can be interesting to report when dealing with asymmetric distributions or when is important to avoid regions with low density.
```

> - Equal-tailed credible interval = Central posterior interval (CPI): To calculate a $100*(1-\alpha)$% interval, there will be $\frac{\alpha}{2}$ probability in both the left and right "tail" of the distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Equal-tailed credible interval = Central posterior interval (CPI): To calculate a $100*(1-\alpha)$% interval, there will be $\frac{\alpha}{2}$ probability in both the left and right tails of the distribution.
```

For symmetric, unimodal distributions, HPDI and CPI are the same (see first figure below).
Otherwise there may be quite a difference between the two intervals (see figures 2 and 3 below).

A good example of bimodal data is the size of stag beetles where males are much larger than females.
If we would plot the size of all stag beetles, we would obtain something close to the second and third figure below.
The second figure below shows the HPDI.

> It can be seen that there are little beetles with a size between 34.1mm and 37.5mm: this is slightly too large for a female and to small for a male. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be seen that there are little beetles with a size between 34.1mm and 37.5mm: this is slightly too large for a female and too small for a male. 
```

These sizes of beetles are therefor excluded from the HPDI.

> The equal-tailed credible interval would yields two boundaries; 5% of the beetles are smaller than the lower interval (27.4mm) and 5% are larger than the upper limit of the interval (46.9mm) as can be seen in the third figure below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The equal-tailed credible interval would yield two boundaries; 5% of the beetles are smaller than the lower interval (27.4mm) and 5% are larger than the upper limit of the interval (46.9mm) as can be seen in the third figure below.
```

```{r, purl = FALSE}
# specify a unimodal, symmetric distribution
unimodal <- data.frame(
  x = seq(10, 50)
) %>%
  mutate(prob = dnorm(x, mean = 30, sd = 5),
        cum_sum = pnorm(x, mean = 30, sd = 5))
limits <- data.frame(type = c("CPI", "CPI", "HPDI", "HPDI"),
                     x = c(22, 38, 22, 38))

p1 <- ggplot(unimodal) +
  geom_line(aes(x = x, y = prob)) +
  geom_vline(data = limits, aes(xintercept = x, color = type, lty = type,
                                size = type),
             alpha = 0.7) +
  scale_color_manual(breaks = c("CPI", "HPDI"), values = c("black", "red")) +
  scale_linetype_manual(breaks = c("CPI", "HPDI"),
                        values = c("solid", "dashed"))

# specify a bimodal distribution
bimodal <- data.frame(
  x = seq(20, 60, 0.1)
) %>%
  mutate(prob = (dnorm(x, mean = 43, sd = 3) +
           dnorm(x, mean = 30, sd = 2))/2,
        cum_sum = (pnorm(x, mean = 43, sd = 3) + pnorm(x, mean = 30, sd = 2))/2)

> measures <- data.frame(measures = c("mean", "mode", "mediaan"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
measures <- data.frame(measures = c("mean", "mode", "median"),
```

p2 <- ggplot(bimodal) +
  geom_vline(data = limits %>% filter(type == "HPDI"), aes(xintercept = x)) +
  geom_bar(data = bimodal %>%
             filter((x >= 25.9 & x <= 34.1) | (x >= 37.5 & x <= 48.5)),
           aes(x = x, y = prob),
           stat = "identity", color = "grey", fill = "grey") +
  ggtitle("highest posterior density interval for a bimodal distribution") +
  geom_line(aes(x = x, y = prob)) + 
  geom_vline(data = measures, aes(xintercept = x), color = "red") +
  geom_label(data = measures,
            aes(label = measures, x = x, y = c(0.1, 0.09, 0.08)), fill = "red",
            alpha = 0.5) +
  geom_hline(aes(yintercept = 0.0123), lty = 2)
p3 <- ggplot(bimodal) +
  geom_vline(data = limits %>% filter(type == "CPI"), aes(xintercept = x)) +
  geom_bar(data = bimodal %>% filter(x >= 27.4 & x <= 46.9),
           aes(x = x, y = prob),
           stat = "identity", color = "grey", fill = "grey") +
  ggtitle("equal tail credible interval for a bimodal distribution") +
  geom_line(aes(x = x, y = prob))
p1 
```

```{r, purl = FALSE}
p2
```

```{r, purl = FALSE}
p3
```

## MCMC software

There exist a number of software programs that apply MCMC for parameter estimates.

> Jags, Nimble and Stan are three examples for which an R interface exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jags, Nimble and Stan are three examples for which there is an R interface.
```

A [recent comparison between these three](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2107.09357v1.pdf) shows that each of these three has strengths and weaknesses but that Stan, overall, is the best performer.

> In this course we choose the R package [`brms`](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/brms/vignettes/brms_overview.pdf) which provides a convenient, simple interface for Stan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this course we choose the R package [**brms**](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/brms/vignettes/brms_overview.pdf) which provides a convenient, simple interface for Stan.
```

Some alternatives also exist:

> - [RStan](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rstan/vignettes/rstan.html) is the basis of `brms`. You need 'RStan' to use 'brms' because it communicates directly with Stan. However, a model composed in "Pure" Stan code is quite cumbersome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [rstan](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rstan/vignettes/rstan.html) is the basis of **brms**. You need **rstan** to use **brms** because it communicates directly with Stan. A model composed in "pure" Stan code can be fitted with the **rstan** package in R (so without using **brms**), but can become quite complex.
```

> - [rstanarm](https://mc-stan.org/rstanarm/articles/index.html) is equally hard (or rather simple) as `brms` in terms of syntax. Moreover, with 'rstanarm' you can use some pre-compiled Stan models. This means that fitting your model takes less time. A large part of the process time of `brms` goes into compiling the Stan program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [rstanarm](https://mc-stan.org/rstanarm/articles/index.html) is similar to **brms** in terms of complexity of the syntax. Moreover, with the **rstanarm** package you can use some pre-compiled Stan models. This means that fitting your model takes less time. A large part of the process time of **brms** goes into compiling the Stan program.
```

![Overview of various Stan software (source: https://jtimonen.github.io/posts/post-01/)](software.png)

# Fitting a model with brms

## Loading the dataset and data exploration

We load a dataset on the number of ant species in New England (USA). Type `?ants` into the console for more info.

```{r data-expl-load-data}
# Load data
data(ants)

> # Copy column names in lower-case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Set column names to lower case
```

ants_df <- ants %>%
  rename(sp_rich = Srich) %>%
  rename_with(tolower)

# What does the data look like?
glimpse(ants_df)
```

> We have a number of sites (`site`) where the number of ant species has been counted (`sp_rich`). Some variables are present: 'habitat', 'latitude' and height ('elevation'). Let's look at some summary statistics. Two counts were made at each site: one in a swamp ('bog') and one in a forest ('forest').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a number of sites (`site`) where the number of ant species has been counted (`sp_rich`). Some variables are present: `habitat`, `latitude` and `elevation`. Let's look at some summary statistics. Two counts were made at each site: one in a bog and one in a forest.
```

```{r data-expl-summary}
# Summary statistics dataset
summary(ants_df)
```

We visualise the data.

```{r data-expl-vis1}

> # Frequency number of species in each habitat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Frequency of the number of species in each habitat
```

ants_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = sp_rich)) +
    geom_bar() +
    scale_x_continuous(limits = c(0, NA)) +
    facet_wrap(~habitat)
```

```{r data-expl-vis2}

> # Boxplots number of species per habitat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Boxplots of the number of species per habitat
```

ants_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(y = sp_rich, x = habitat)) +
    geom_boxplot() +
    geom_line(aes(colour = site, group = site), alpha = 0.5) +
    geom_point(aes(colour = site, group = site)) +
    scale_y_continuous(limits = c(0, NA))
```

```{r data-expl-vis3}

> # Scatter plot number species and latitude per habitat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scatter plot of the number of species in function of latitude per habitat
```

ants_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(y = sp_rich, x = latitude)) +
    geom_point() +
    geom_smooth(method = "loess", formula = "y ~ x", colour = "firebrick",
                level = 0.9) +
    facet_wrap(~habitat)
```

```{r data-expl-vis4}

> # Scatter plot number species en height per habitat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scatter plot of the number of species in function of elevation per habitat
```

ants_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(y = sp_rich, x = elevation)) +
    geom_point() +
    geom_smooth(method = "loess", formula = "y ~ x", colour = "firebrick",
                level = 0.9) +
    facet_wrap(~habitat)
```

As an exercise, we will create a model to compare the number of species between both habitats.

> From the data exploration, we already saw that the number of species seems to be higher in forests and that sites with a higher number in swamps often also have a higher number in forests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the data exploration, we already saw that the number of species seems to be higher in forests and that sites with a higher number in bogs often also have a higher number in forests.
```

## Specification of a linear regression

### Model specification

> We want a model that allows us to investigate the difference in number of ant species between swamp and forest habitats. Consider the response variable $Y$, the number of ants, and $X_{habitat}$, a dummy variable equal to 0 for swamps and 1 for forests. We assume that $Y$ follows a Normal distribution (equivalent to a linear regression with categorical variable (= ANOVA)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want a model that allows us to investigate the difference in number of ant species between bog and forest habitats. Consider the response variable $Y$, the number of ants, and $X_{habitat}$, a dummy variable equal to 0 for bogs and 1 for forests. We assume that $Y$ follows a Normal distribution (equivalent to a linear regression with categorical variable (= ANOVA)).
```

$$

So we need to estimate three parameters: $\beta_0$, $\beta_1$ and $\sigma$. How do we specify this in **brms**?

First of all we decide which MCMC parameters we will use. Type `?brm` to see what the default settings are for these parameters. It is recommended to use multiple chains (`nchains`) and run them in parallel on different cores of your computer (`nparallel`). Since this is a relatively simple model, we don't need many iterations and no thinning.

```{r simple-model-mcmc-par}
# Set MCMC parameters
nchains <- 3 # number of chains
niter <- 2000 # number of iterations (incl. burn-in, see next)
burnin <- niter / 4 # number of initial samples to remove (= burn-in)
nparallel <- nchains # number of cores for parallel computing
thinning <- 1 # thinning factor (here 1 = no thinning)
```

The model is fitted using the `brm()` function. The syntax is very similar to functions used in frequentist statistics such as `lm()` and `glm()`. The `brm()` function contains many arguments (see `?brm`). Useful arguments that we do not use here are, for example:

- `inits` to set the initial values of MCMC algorithm. If these are not specified, the function uses default values.

> - `prior` to provide prior distributions. If these are not specified, the function uses default (non-informative) priors. The argument `sample_prior` can be used to sample from the prior so that you can visualize whether the used prior meets your expectations (also useful for [prior predictive checks](https://arelbundock.com/posts/marginaleffects_priors/)) .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `prior` to provide prior distributions. If these are not specified, the function uses default (non-informative) priors. The argument `sample_prior` can be used to sample from the prior so that you can visualise whether the used prior meets your expectations (also useful for [prior predictive checks](https://arelbundock.com/posts/marginaleffects_priors/)) .
```

- `file` and `file_refit` to save the model object after it has been fitted. If you run the code again and the model has already been saved, `brm()` will simply load this model instead of refitting it.

```{r simple-model-fit-poisson}

> # Fit Normaal model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Fit Normal model
```

fit_normal1 <- brm(
  formula = sp_rich ~ habitat, # specify the model
  family = gaussian(),         # we use the Normal distribution
  data = ants_df,              # specify data
  chains = nchains,            # MCMC parameters
  warmup = burnin, 
  iter = niter,
  cores = nparallel,
  thin = thinning,

>   seed = 123)                  # seed reproducibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  seed = 123)                  # seed for reproducibility
```

```

> Before we look at the results, we first check whether the model converges well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we look at the results, we first check whether the model converged well. This entails that all chains have reached a stationary distribution, providing consistent and reliable estimates of the posterior distribution for the model parameters.
```

### MCMC convergence

There are several ways to check convergence of the MCMC algorithm for each parameter. The burn-in samples are not taken into account. First and foremost, you have *visual controls*.

> We can obtain the MCMC samples with the `as_draws()` functions or visualize them at once via the [bayesplot](https://mc-stan.org/bayesplot/) package that is compatible with brmsfit objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can obtain the MCMC samples with the `as_draws()` functions or visualise them at once via the [**bayesplot**](https://mc-stan.org/bayesplot/) package that is compatible with brmsfit objects.
```

```{r simple-model-colorscheme}

> # Set color palette for clear visualization in bayes plot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Set colour palette for clear visualisation in bayesplot
```

color_scheme_set("mix-blue-red")
```

```{r}
# Which parameters to look at?
parameters <- c("b_Intercept", "b_habitatForest", "sigma")
```

**trace plot**

Trace plots indicate how the sampling of the posterior distribution progresses over time. The idea is that each chain converges to the same distribution for each parameter (this is called mixing). If this plot looks like a fuzzy caterpillar, it means the convergence is good.

```{r simple-model-trace1}

> # Visualization by extracting samples with as_draws_df()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Visualisation by extracting samples with as_draws_df()
```

as_draws_df(fit_normal1, variable = parameters) %>%
  # long format
  pivot_longer(cols = all_of(parameters), names_to = "parameter",
               values_to = "value") %>%

>   # visualize with ggplot()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # visualise with ggplot()
```

  ggplot(aes(y = value, x = .iteration, colour = factor(.chain))) +
    geom_line() +
    facet_wrap(~parameter, nrow = 3, scales = "free")
```

```{r simple-model-trace2}

> # Visualise with Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Visualise with bayesplot package
```

mcmc_trace(fit_normal1, pars = parameters)
```

**running mean/quantile/... plot**

> In addition to a trace plot, we can also look at how certain statistics such as the average or the quantiles vary over time (= with increasing number of iterations). You naturally want these statistics to stabilize after a number of iterations because then you know that you have used enough iterations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to a trace plot, we can also look at how certain statistics, such as the average or the quantiles, vary over time (= with increasing number of iterations). You want these statistics to stabilize after a number of iterations because then you know that you have used enough iterations.
```

```{r simple-model-posterior-density}

> # code to calculate cumulative quantiles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Code to calculate cumulative quantiles
```

# source: https://rdrr.io/cran/cumstats/src/R/cumquant.R
cumquant <- function(x, p) {
  out <- sapply(seq_along(x),
                function(k, z) quantile(z[1:k], probs = p[1], names = FALSE),
                z = x)
  return(out)
}
```

```{r simple-model-cum-stat}
# Extract samples and calculate cumulative statistics
as_draws_df(fit_normal1, variable = parameters) %>%
  mutate(across(all_of(parameters), ~cummean(.x),

>                 .names = "{.col}_gemiddelde"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                .names = "{.col}_mean"),
```

         across(all_of(parameters), ~cumquant(.x, 0.05),
                .names = "{.col}_q05"),
         across(all_of(parameters), ~cumquant(.x, 0.95),
                .names = "{.col}_q95")) %>%
  select(-all_of(parameters)) %>%
  # long format for visualisation
  pivot_longer(cols = starts_with(parameters), names_to = "name",
               values_to = "value") %>%

>   # splits columns names at the last underscore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # split column names at the last underscore
```

>   extract(name, into = c("parameter", "statistiek"), "(.*)_([^_]+)$") %>%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  extract(name, into = c("parameter", "statistic"), "(.*)_([^_]+)$") %>%
```

  ggplot(aes(y = value, x = .iteration, colour = factor(.chain))) +

>     geom_line(aes(linetype = statistiek), linewidth = 0.8) +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    geom_line(aes(linetype = statistic), linewidth = 0.8) +
```

    facet_wrap(~parameter, nrow = 3, scales = "free")
```

**posterior density plot**

> The shape of the posterior distributions can also be informative to check whether the chains have converged to the same distributions. If we see a bimodal distribution (a camel's ridge with two peaks), then there could also be something wrong with the specification of our model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shape of the posterior distributions can also be informative to check whether the chains have converged to the same distribution. If we see a bimodal distribution (a camel's ridge with two peaks) for example, then there could also be something wrong with the specification of our model.
```

```{r simple-model-posterior-density2}

> # Visualize density plot of the posterior for each of the chains separately

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Visualise density plot of the posterior for each of the chains separately
```

> # overlay. via Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# via bayesplot package
```

mcmc_dens_overlay(fit_normal1, pars = parameters)
```

It is even easier to use the `plot()` function on the brmsfit object. This immediately shows the trace plots and the posterior density plots side by side for each parameter.

```{r}

> # trace plots and posterior density for each parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Trace plots and posterior density for each parameter
```

To discover the posterior, we would have to do a complete random walk through the parameter space where the location on iteration $i$ is completely independent of the location on iteration $i-1$.
In an MCMC there will often be some autocorrelation and it is important to check whether this autocorrelation is not too large.
The so-called lag indicates how much correlation there is between values that are 1, 2, 3 ... iterations apart.
Autocorrelation can, for example, be the result of a poorly chosen step size, a poorly chosen start location, or multimodality in the posterior.
If the autocorrelation is high, the Markov chain will be inefficient, i.e. we will need many iterations to obtain a good approximation of the posterior distribution (see also effective sample size below).

If there is too much autocorrelation, thinning is often used whereby some iterations are removed from the chain.
This will reduce the autocorrelation but also the number of posterior samples we have left.

```{r simple-model-autocorrelation}

> # Visualization of autocorrelation plots via Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Visualisation of autocorrelation plots via bayesplot package
```

mcmc_acf(fit_normal1, pars = parameters)
```

In addition to visual checks, there are also *diagnostic checks*.

> **Gelman-Rubin diagnosis**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Gelman-Rubin diagnostic**
```

> Also called $\hat{R}$ (R-hat) or potential scale reduction factor. One way to check whether a chain has converged is to compare its behavior with other randomly initialized chains. The $\hat{R}$ statistic takes the ratio of the average variance of samples within each chain to the variance of the pooled samples across all chains. If all chains converge to a common distribution, these ratios will equal 1. If the chains have not converged to a common distribution, the $\hat{R}$ statistic will be greater than 1. We can extract the $\hat{R}$ statistics via the `rhat()` function and then visualize it if necessary with the `mcmc_rhat()` function of the **bayesplot** package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also called $\hat{R}$ (R-hat) or potential scale reduction factor. One way to check whether a chain has converged is to compare its behaviour with other randomly initialized chains. The $\hat{R}$ statistic takes the ratio of the average variance of samples within each chain to the variance of the pooled samples across all chains. If all chains converge to a common distribution, these ratios will equal 1. If the chains have not converged to a common distribution, the $\hat{R}$ statistic will be greater than 1. We can extract the $\hat{R}$ statistics via the `rhat()` function and then visualise it if necessary with the `mcmc_rhat()` function of the **bayesplot** package.
```

> Also called $\hat{R}$ (R-hat) or potential scale reduction factor. One way to check whether a chain has converged is to compare its behavior with other randomly initialized chains. The $\hat{R}$ statistic takes the ratio of the average variance of samples within each chain to the variance of the pooled samples across all chains. If all chains converge to a common distribution, these ratios will equal 1. If the chains have not converged to a common distribution, the $\hat{R}$ statistic will be greater than 1. We can extract the $\hat{R}$ statistics via the `rhat()` function and then visualize it if necessary with the `mcmc_rhat()` function of the **bayesplot** package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also called $\hat{R}$ (R-hat) or potential scale reduction factor. One way to check whether a chain has converged is to compare its behavior with other randomly initialized chains. The $\hat{R}$ statistic takes the ratio of the average variance of samples within each chain to the variance of the pooled samples across all chains. If all chains converge to a common distribution, these ratios will equal 1. If the chains have not converged to a common distribution, the $\hat{R}$ statistic will be greater than 1. We can extract the $\hat{R}$ statistics via the `rhat()` function and then visualize them if desired with the `mcmc_rhat()` function of the **bayesplot** package.
```

```{r simple-model-get-Rhat}
# Get R-hats
rhats_fit_normal1 <- rhat(fit_normal1)[parameters]
print(rhats_fit_normal1)
```

```{r simple-model-plot-Rhat}

> # Plot R-hats via Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Plot R-hats via bayesplot package
```

mcmc_rhat(rhats_fit_normal1) + yaxis_text(hjust = 1)
```

**effective sample size**

The effective sample size ($n_{eff}$) is an estimate of the number of independent draws from the posterior distribution of each parameter. Since the draws within a Markov chain are not independent when there is autocorrelation, the effective sample size is usually smaller than the total sample size, namely the number of iterations ($N$). The larger the ratio $n_{eff}/N$ the better. The **bayesplot** package provides a `neff_ratio()` extractor function. The `mcmc_neff()` function can then be used to plot the ratios.

```{r simple-model-get-effective-sample-size}
# Get ratio of effective sample size
ratios_fit_normal1 <- neff_ratio(fit_normal1)[parameters]
print(ratios_fit_normal1)
```

```{r simple-model-plot- effective-sample-size}

> # Plot ratio via Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Plot ratio via bayesplot package
```

mcmc_neff(ratios_fit_normal1) + yaxis_text(hjust = 1)
```

> Other packages that may be useful in checking MCMC convergence are [mcmcplots](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/mcmcplots/index.html) and [coda](https://cran .r-project.org/web/packages/coda/index.html). For these packages you must first convert the MCMC samples from your **brms** model to an mcmc object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other packages that may be useful for checking MCMC convergence are [mcmcplots](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/mcmcplots/index.html) and [coda](https://cran .r-project.org/web/packages/coda/index.html). For these packages you must first convert the MCMC samples from your **brms** model to an mcmc object.
```

```         
# example
install.packages("mcmcplots")
mcmcplots::mcmcplot(as.mcmc(fit_normal1, pars = parameters))
```

> In general, we can conclude that MCMC convergence is good for all parameters. If this were not the case, the MCMC parameters may have to be chosen differently, for example by increasing the number of iterations. Now that we know that the parameters have been estimated correctly, we can check whether the model fits the data well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, we can conclude that MCMC convergence is good for all parameters in our Normal model. If this were not the case, the MCMC parameters may have to be chosen differently, for example by increasing the number of iterations. Now that we know that the parameters have been estimated correctly, we can check whether the model fits the data well.
```

### Model fit

> The [posterior predictive check](https://mc-stan.org/bayesplot/articles/graphical-ppcs.html) (PPC) is a good way to check whether the model fits the data well. The idea behind the PPC is that, if a model fits well, the predicted values based on the model are very similar to the data we used to fit the model. To generate the predictions used for PPCs, we simulate several times from the posterior predictive distribution (the posterior distribution of the response variable). Visualization is possible with the **bayesplot** package. The thick line shows the data and the thin lines show different simulations based on the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [posterior predictive check](https://mc-stan.org/bayesplot/articles/graphical-ppcs.html) (PPC) is a good way to check whether the model fits the data well. The idea behind the PPC is that, if a model fits well, the predicted values based on the model are very similar to the data we used to fit the model. To generate the predictions used for PPCs, we simulate several times from the posterior predictive distribution (the posterior distribution of the response variable). Visualisation is possible with the **bayesplot** package. The thick line shows the data and the thin lines show different simulations based on the model.
```

```{r simple-model-fit1}

> # Visualise model fit via Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Visualise model fit via bayesplot package
```

pp_check(fit_normal1, type = "dens_overlay_grouped", ndraws = 100, 
         group = "habitat")
```

> We see that the observed data and the predictions based on our model do not quite match. Our choice for the Normal distribution may have been wrong. Numbers are discrete, positive values, while the Normal distribution can predict continuous and both positive and negative values. The Poisson distribution is a discrete distribution that is always positive. It is often used to model recorded numbers over a given time interval, distance, area, volume...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We see that the observed data and the predictions based on our model do not quite match. Our choice for the Normal distribution may have been wrong. Numbers are discrete, positive values, while the Normal distribution can predict continuous and both positive and negative values. The Poisson distribution is a discrete distribution that is always positive. It is often used to model numbers recorded over a given time interval, distance, area, volume ...
```

**Remark:**

> Note that MCMC convergence and model fit are two different things. Just because MCMC convergence is good does not mean that model fit is also good. MCMC convergence is to check whether the MCMC algorithm has been able to correctly approximate the distributions of the parameters. Model fit checks whether the model we have adopted (normality assumption, linear relationship average...) fits the data well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that MCMC convergence and model fit are two different things. Just because MCMC convergence is good, does not mean that model fit is also good. MCMC convergence is to check whether the MCMC algorithm has been able to correctly approximate the distributions of the parameters. Model fit checks whether the model we have adopted (normality assumption, linear relationship average...) fits the data well.
```

## Specification of a Poisson model

### Model specification

> We assume that $Y$ now follows a Poisson distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume now that $Y$ now follows a Poisson distribution
```

$$
Y \sim Pois(\lambda)
$$

with

$$
\ln(\lambda) = \beta_0 + \beta_1X_{habitat}
$$

So we need to estimate two parameters: $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$ We use the same MCMC parameters as before. The only thing we need to adjust is the choice `family = poisson()`.

```{r poisson-model-fit}
# Fit Poisson model
fit_poisson1 <- brm(
  formula = sp_rich ~ habitat, # specify the model
  family = poisson(),          # we use the Poisson distribution
  data = ants_df,              # specify the data
  chains = nchains,            # MCMC parameters
  warmup = burnin, 
  iter = niter,
  cores = nparallel,
  thin = thinning,

>   seed = 123)                  # seed voor reproducability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  seed = 123)                  # seed for reproducibility
```

```

### MCMC convergence

> Convergence again looks good.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Convergence looks good.
```

```{r poisson-model-convergence}
# Visualise MCMC convergence of the Poisson model
plot(fit_poisson1)
```

```{r poisson-model-Rhat}
# Extract and visualise R-hat values
rhats_fit_poisson1 <- rhat(fit_poisson1)[c("b_Intercept", "b_habitatForest")]
mcmc_rhat(rhats_fit_poisson1) + yaxis_text(hjust = 1)
```

### Model fit

We see that all predictions are now positive, but the fit is still not perfect.

```{r poisson-model-fit-vis}

> # Visualiseer model fit via Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Visualise model fit via bayesplot package
```

pp_check(fit_poisson1, type = "dens_overlay_grouped", ndraws = 100, 
         group = "habitat")
```

### Discussion

How can we further improve model fit?

> We know that each site has been visited twice. Once in swamp and once in forest. It is of course possible that the number of ants in the swamp and forest of the same site will be correlated (site effect). We indeed also saw this in the data exploration. Sites with higher numbers of species in swamps often also have higher numbers in forests and vice versa. We can correct this by adding a random intercept for each site `... + (1|site)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We know that each site has been visited twice. Once in bog and once in forest. It is of course possible that the number of ants in the bog and forest of the same site will be correlated (site effect). Indeed, this is something we noticed during data exploration as well. Sites with higher numbers of species in bogs often also have higher numbers in forests and vice versa. We can correct this by adding a random intercept for each site `... + (1|site)`.
```

We assume that the number of species $Y$ per site $j$ ($j = 1, ..., J$) follows a Poisson distribution

$$
Y_j \sim Pois(\lambda_j)
$$

such that

$$
\ln(\lambda_j) = \beta_0 + \beta_1X_{habitat} + b_{0,j}
$$
with

$$
b_0 \sim N(0, \sigma_b)
$$

```{r rand-intercept-model-fit}
# Fit Poisson model with random intercept per site
fit_poisson2 <- brm(
  formula = sp_rich ~ habitat + (1|site),
  family = poisson(),
  data = ants_df,
  chains = nchains,
  warmup = burnin, 
  iter = niter,
  cores = nparallel,
  thin = thinning,
  seed = 123)
```

> Convergentie is goed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Convergence looks good.
```

> ```{r rand-intercept-model-convergentie}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r rand-intercept-model-convergence}
```

# Visualise MCMC convergence
plot(fit_poisson2)
```

```{r rand-intercept-model-rhat}
# Extract and visualise R-hat values
parameters2 <- c("b_Intercept", "b_habitatForest", "sd_site__Intercept")
rhats_fit_poisson2 <- rhat(fit_poisson2)[parameters2]
mcmc_rhat(rhats_fit_poisson2) + yaxis_text(hjust = 1)
```

> Model fit lijkt nu nog beter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model fit looks again better than before.
```

```{r rand-intercept-model-fit-vis}
# Visualise model fit of the Poisson model with random intercept via

> # Bayesplot package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# bayesplot package
```

pp_check(fit_poisson2, type = "dens_overlay_grouped", ndraws = 100, 
         group = "habitat")
```

How can we objectively compare these models?

# Compare models

> Based on the PPCs we can already see which model fits the data fits. Furthermore, there are some functions that **brms** provides to compare different models. With the function `add_criterion()` you can add model fit criteria to model objects. Type `?add_criterion()` to see which ones are available. See also <https://mc-stan.org/loo/articles/online-only/faq.html>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the PPCs we can already see which model fits the data best. Furthermore, there are some functions that **brms** provides to compare different models. With the function `add_criterion()` you can add model fit criteria to model objects. Type `?add_criterion()` to see which ones are available. See also <https://mc-stan.org/loo/articles/online-only/faq.html>
```

## Leave-one-out cross validation

> Cross-validation (CV) is a family of techniques that attempts to estimate how well a model would predict unknown data through predictions of the model fitted to the known data. You do not necessarily have to collect new data for this. You can split your own data into a test and training dataset. You fit the model to the training dataset and then use that model to estimate how well it can predict the data in the test dataset. With leave-one-out CV (LOOCV) you leave out one observation each time and refit the model based on all other observations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cross-validation (CV) is a family of techniques that attempts to estimate how well a model would predict unknown data through predictions of the model fitted to the known data. You do not necessarily have to collect new data for this. You can split your own data into a test and training dataset. You fit the model to the training dataset and then use that model to estimate how well it can predict the data in the test dataset. With leave-one-out CV (LOOCV) you leave out one observation each time as test dataset and refit the model based on all other observations (= training dataset).
```

![Figure LOOCV.](loocv.png)

```{r compare-loocv}

> # Add leave-one-out model fit criterium toe to model objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add leave-one-out model fit criterium to model objects
```

fit_normal1 <- add_criterion(fit_normal1,
                             criterion = c("loo"))
fit_poisson1 <- add_criterion(fit_poisson1,
                              criterion = c("loo"))
fit_poisson2 <- add_criterion(fit_poisson2,
                              criterion = c("loo"))
```

> To determine the difference between the model's prediction based on the training dataset with the omitted data, we must define a so-called utility or loss function. We use the 'expected log pointwise predictive density' (ELPD) here. For this workshop, it is especially important to understand that this is a measure of how well your Bayesian model predicts new data points. It is calculated by taking the log-likelihood of each data point from the posterior predictive distribution of your model and then averaging it. A higher ELPD indicates better model fit and predictive accuracy. For this workshop, it is especially important to understand that this is a measure of how well the model can predict unknown data (`elpd_loo` and the standard error `se_elpd_loo`). `p_loo` is a measure of the complexity of the model. $\text{looic} = -2*\text{elpd_loo}$ With the function `loo_compare()` you can compare multiple models and the difference in ELPD is also calculated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To determine the difference between the model's prediction based on the training dataset with the omitted data, we must define a so-called utility or loss function. We use the 'expected log pointwise predictive density' (ELPD) here. For this tutorial, it is mainly important to understand that this is a measure of how well your Bayesian model predicts new data points. It is calculated by taking the log-likelihood of each data point from the posterior predictive distribution of your model and then averaging it. A higher ELPD indicates better model fit and predictive accuracy. For this tutorial, it is important to understand that this is a measure of how well the model can predict unknown data (`elpd_loo` and the standard error `se_elpd_loo`). `p_loo` is a measure of the complexity of the model. $\text{looic} = -2*\text{elpd_loo}$ With the function `loo_compare()` you can compare multiple models and the difference in ELPD is also calculated.
```

```{r compare-loocv-compare}
# Make comparison leave-one-out cross-validation and print
comp_loo <- loo_compare(fit_normal1, fit_poisson1, fit_poisson2,
                        criterion = "loo")
print(comp_loo, simplify = FALSE, digits = 3)
```

If you assume that this difference is normally distributed, you can calculate a confidence interval based on the uncertainty. We see that the second Poisson model scores best and that the other models score significantly lower.

```{r compare-loocv-ci}

> # Calculate confidence interval to compare models with loocv

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Calculate confidence interval to compare models with leave-one-out CV
```

![Figure K-fold CV.](k-foldcv.png)

```{r compare-K-fold}
# Add K-fold model fit criterium to model objects
fit_normal1 <- add_criterion(fit_normal1,
                             criterion = c("kfold"),
                             K = 10,
                             folds = "stratified",
                             group = "habitat")
fit_poisson1 <- add_criterion(fit_poisson1,
                              criterion = c("kfold"),
                              K = 10,
                              folds = "stratified",
                              group = "habitat")
fit_poisson2 <- add_criterion(fit_poisson2,
                              criterion = c("kfold"),
                              K = 10,
                              folds = "stratified",
                              group = "habitat")
```

We get the same statistics as before.

```{r compare-K-fold-compare}
# Get k-fold cross-validation and print
comp_kfold <- loo_compare(fit_normal1, fit_poisson1, fit_poisson2,
                          criterion = "kfold")
print(comp_kfold, simplify = FALSE, digits = 3)
```

> The results are the same, but the differences are slightly smaller than before. The difference between the two Poisson models is no longer significant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results are the same, but the differences are slightly smaller than before.
```

```{r compare-K-fold-ci}
# Calculate confidence interval to compare models with K-fold CV
comp_kfold %>%
  as.data.frame() %>%
  select(elpd_diff, se_diff) %>%
  mutate(ll_diff = elpd_diff  + qnorm(0.05) * se_diff,
         ul_diff = elpd_diff  + qnorm(0.95) * se_diff)
```

## WAIC

> The Widely Applicable Information Criterion (WAIC) does not use cross-validation but is a computational way to estimate the ELPD. How this happens exactly is beyond the purpose of this workshop. It is yet another measure to apply model selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Widely Applicable Information Criterion (WAIC) does not use cross-validation but is a computational way to estimate the ELPD. How this happens exactly is beyond the purpose of this tutorial. It is yet another measure to apply model selection.
```

```{r compare-WAIC}
# Add WAIC model fit criterion to model objects
fit_normal1 <- add_criterion(fit_normal1,
                             criterion = c("waic"))
fit_poisson1 <- add_criterion(fit_poisson1,
                              criterion = c("waic"))
fit_poisson2 <- add_criterion(fit_poisson2,
                              criterion = c("waic"))
```

We get similar results as before.

```{r comparen-WAIC-compare}

> # Get waic en print

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Get waic and print
```

comp_waic <- loo_compare(fit_normal1, fit_poisson1, fit_poisson2,
                         criterion = "waic")
print(comp_waic, simplify = FALSE, digits = 3)
```

```{r comparen-WAIC-ci}
# Calculate confidence interval to compare models with WAIC
comp_waic %>%
  as.data.frame() %>%
  select(waic, elpd_diff, se_diff) %>%
  mutate(ll_diff = elpd_diff  + qnorm(0.05) * se_diff,
         ul_diff = elpd_diff  + qnorm(0.95) * se_diff)
```

## Conclusion

Both based on the PPC and the comparisons with different model selection criteria, we can conclude that the second Poisson model with random intercepts fits the data best. In principle, we could have expected this based on our own intuition and the design of the study, i.e. the use of the Poisson distribution to model numbers and the use of random intercepts to control for a hierarchical design (habitats nested within sites).

# Final model results

> When we look at the model fit object, we see results that are similar to results we see when we fit a frequentist model. On the one hand we get an estimate of all parameters with their uncertainty, but on the other hand we see that this is clearly the output of a Bayesian model. We get information about the parameters we used for the MCMC algorithm, we get a 95% credible interval (CI) instead of a confidence interval and we also get the $\hat{R}$ value that we use for each parameter. discussed earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we look at the model fit object, we see results that are similar to results we see when we fit a frequentist model. On the one hand we get an estimate of all parameters with their uncertainty, but on the other hand we see that this is clearly the output of a Bayesian model. We get information about the parameters we used for the MCMC algorithm, we get a 95% credible interval (CI) instead of a confidence interval and we also get the $\hat{R}$ value for each parameter as discussed earlier.
```

```{r results-fit-poisson}
# Look at the fit object of the Poisson model with random effects
fit_poisson2
```

A useful package for visualizing the results of our final model is the [tidybayes](https://mjskay.github.io/tidybayes/articles/tidy-brms.html) package. Through this package, you can work with the posterior distributions as you would work with any dataset through the **tidyverse** package.

> With the function `gather_draws()` you can take a certain number of samples of the posterior distributions of certain parameters and convert them into a long format table. You usually do not want to select all posterior samples because there are often unnecessarily many. By specifying a 'seed' you ensure that these are the same samples every time you run the script again. You can then calculate certain summary statistics via the classic **dplyr** functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the function `gather_draws()` you can take a certain number of samples from the posterior distributions of certain parameters and convert them into a long format table. You usually do not want to select all posterior samples because there are sometimes unnecessarily many. By specifying a 'seed' you ensure that these are the same samples every time you run the script again. You can then calculate certain summary statistics via the classic **dplyr** functions.
```

```{r results-fit-poisson-2}
fit_poisson2 %>%
  # gather 1000 posterior samples for 2 parameters in long format
  gather_draws(b_Intercept, b_habitatForest, ndraws = 1000, seed = 123) %>%
  # calculate summary statistics for each variable
  group_by(.variable) %>%
  summarise(min = min(.value),
            q_05 = quantile(.value, probs = 0.05),
            q_20 = quantile(.value, probs = 0.20),

>             gemiddelde = mean(.value),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            mean = mean(.value),
```

>             mediaan = median(.value),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            median = median(.value),
```

            q_80 = quantile(.value, probs = 0.80),
            q_95 = quantile(.value, probs = 0.95),
            max = max(.value))
```

Useful functions of the **tidybayes** package are also `median_qi()`, `mean_qi()` ... after `gather_draws()` which you can use instead of `group_by()` and `summarise()` .

> We would now like to visualize the estimated number of species per habitat type with associated uncertainty. With the function `spread_draws()` you can take a certain number of samples from the posterior distribution and convert them into a wide format table. The average number of species in swamps according to our model is $\exp(\beta_0)$ and in forests $\exp(\beta_0+\beta_1)$. We show the posterior distributions with the posterior median and 60 and 90% credible intervals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would now like to visualise the estimated number of species per habitat type with associated uncertainty. With the function `spread_draws()` you can take a certain number of samples from the posterior distribution and convert them into a wide format table. The average number of species in bogs according to our model is $\exp(\beta_0)$ and in forests $\exp(\beta_0+\beta_1)$. We show the posterior distributions with the posterior median and 60 and 90% credible intervals.
```

```{r resultats-fit-poisson-3}
fit_poisson2 %>%

>   # vgather 1000 posterior samples for 2 parameters in wide format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # spread 1000 posterior samples for 2 parameters in wide format
```

  spread_draws(b_Intercept, b_habitatForest, ndraws = 1000, seed = 123) %>%

>   # calculate average numbers and convert to long format for visualization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # calculate average numbers and convert to long format for visualisation
```

  mutate(bog = exp(b_Intercept),
         forest = exp(b_Intercept + b_habitatForest)) %>%
  pivot_longer(cols = c("bog", "forest"), names_to = "habitat", 
               values_to = "sp_rich") %>%
  # visualise via ggplot()
  ggplot(aes(y = sp_rich, x = habitat)) +
    stat_eye(point_interval = "median_qi", .width = c(0.6, 0.9)) +
    scale_y_continuous(limits = c(0, NA))
```

> In addition to `stat_eye()` you will find [here](https://mjskay.github.io/tidybayes/articles/tidy-brms.html#other-visualizations-of-distributions-stat_slabinterval) some nice ways to visualize posterior distributions .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to `stat_eye()` you will find [here](https://mjskay.github.io/tidybayes/articles/tidy-brms.html#other-visualizations-of-distributions-stat_slabinterval) some nice ways to visualise posterior distributions .
```

> We see a clear difference in the number of species between the two habitats. Is there a significant difference between the number of species in swamps and forests? We test the hypothesis that numbers are equal in swamps and forests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We see a clear difference in the number of species between the two habitats. Is there a significant difference between the number of species in bogs and forests? We test the hypothesis that numbers are equal in bogs and forests.
```

$$
\exp(\beta_0) = \exp(\beta_0+\beta_1)\\
\Rightarrow \beta_0 = \beta_0 + \beta_1\\
\Rightarrow \beta_1 = 0\\
$$

This can easily be done via the `hypothesis()` function of the **brms** package.
The argument `alpha` specifies the size of the credible interval.
This allows hypothesis testing in a similar way to the frequentist null hypothesis testing framework.

```{r resultats-hypothesis-test}
# Test hypothesis difference between habitats
hyp <- hypothesis(fit_poisson2, "habitatForest = 0", alpha = 0.1)
hyp
```

```{r resultats-hypothesis-test-vis}
# Plot posterior distribution hypothesis
plot(hyp)
```

> Finally, we visualise the random effects of the sites. We sort them from high to low species richness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can conclude that there is a significant difference since 0 is not included in the 90% credible interval.

Finally, we visualise the random effects of the sites. We sort them from high to low species richness.
```

sd_mean <- fit_poisson2 %>%
  spread_draws(sd_site__Intercept, ndraws = 1000, seed = 123) %>%
  summarise(mean_sd = mean(sd_site__Intercept)) %>%
  pull()

# Take random effects and plot
fit_poisson2 %>%
  spread_draws(r_site[site,], ndraws = 1000, seed = 123) %>%
  ungroup() %>%
  mutate(site = reorder(site, r_site)) %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = r_site, y = site)) +
    geom_vline(xintercept = 0, color = "darkgrey", linewidth = 1) +
    geom_vline(xintercept = c(sd_mean * qnorm(0.05), sd_mean * qnorm(0.95)),
               color = "darkgrey", linetype = 2) +
    stat_halfeye(point_interval = "median_qi", .width = 0.9, size = 2/3,
                 fill = "cornflowerblue")
```

# Comparison with frequentist statistics

Let's go back to our very first model where we used the Normal distribution. This was equivalent to a linear regression with categorical variable. A linear regression with categorical variable is also called ANOVA and if there are only two groups, an ANOVA is equivalent to a t-test. We can therefore take the opportunity to compare the results of our first model (a Bayesian model) with the results of a classical (frequentist) t-test.

```{r compare-frequentist}

> # Extract summary statisticsof the  Bayesiaans model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Extract summary statistics from the Bayesian model
```

sum_fit_normal1 <- summary(fit_normal1, prob = 0.9)

> verschil_moeras1 <- sum_fit_normal1$fixed$Estimate[2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
diff_bog1 <- sum_fit_normal1$fixed$Estimate[2]
```

> ll_verschil_moeras1 <- sum_fit_normal1$fixed$`l-90% CI`[2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ll_diff_bog1 <- sum_fit_normal1$fixed$`l-90% CI`[2]
```

> ul_verschil_moeras1 <- sum_fit_normal1$fixed$`u-90% CI`[2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ul_diff_bog1 <- sum_fit_normal1$fixed$`u-90% CI`[2]
```

sum_fit_normal1
```

```{r compare-frequentist-t-test}
# Perform t-test and extract summary statistics
t_test_normal1 <- t.test(sp_rich ~ habitat, data = ants_df, conf.level = 0.9)

> verschil_moeras2 <- t_test_normal1$estimate[2] - t_test_normal1$estimate[1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
diff_bog2 <- t_test_normal1$estimate[2] - t_test_normal1$estimate[1]
```

> ll_verschil_moeras2 <- -t_test_normal1$conf.int[2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ll_diff_bog2 <- -t_test_normal1$conf.int[2]
```

> ul_verschil_moeras2 <- -t_test_normal1$conf.int[1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ul_diff_bog2 <- -t_test_normal1$conf.int[1]
```

t_test_normal1
```

> We see that this indeed produces almost exactly the same results. Our Bayesian model estimates that on average `r round(verschil_moeras1, 3)` more ant species occur in forests than in swamps (90% credible interval:  `r round(ll_verschil_moeras1, 3)` to `r round(ul_verschil_moeras1, 3)`). The t-test estimates that on average `r round(verschil_moeras2, 3)` more ant species occur in forests than in swamps (90% confidence interval: `r round(ll_verschil_moeras2, 3)` to `r round(ul_verschil_moeras2, 3)`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We see that this indeed produces almost exactly the same results. Our Bayesian model estimates that on average `r round(diff_bog1, 3)` more ant species occur in forests than in bogs (90% credible interval:  `r round(ll_diff_bog1, 3)` to `r round(ul_diff_bog1, 3)`). The t-test estimates that on average `r round(diff_bog2, 3)` more ant species occur in forests than in bogs (90% confidence interval: `r round(ll_diff_bog2, 3)` to `r round(ul_diff_bog2, 3)`).
```

# References {-}

- Stan User Guide [(link)](https://mc-stan.org/docs/2_18/stan-users-guide/index.html).

> - Brms documentation [(link)](https://mc-stan.org/users/interfaces/brms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **brms** documentation [(link)](https://mc-stan.org/users/interfaces/brms).
```

> - Ben Lambert has a  [youtube channem](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC3tFZR3eL1bDY8CqZDOQh-w) with a student's guide to Bayesian statistics, a [short course](https://ben-lambert.com/biology/) and [detailed slides](https://ben-lambert.com/bayesian-lecture-slides/) on Bayesian statistics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ben Lambert has a  [youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC3tFZR3eL1bDY8CqZDOQh-w) with a student's guide to Bayesian statistics, a [short course](https://ben-lambert.com/biology/) and [detailed slides](https://ben-lambert.com/bayesian-lecture-slides/) on Bayesian statistics.
```

> - rstanarm vignettes [(link)](https://mc-stan.org/rstanarm/articles/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **rstanarm** vignettes [(link)](https://mc-stan.org/rstanarm/articles/)
```
